What I've learned about choosing a Linux laptop

When I first used a laptop, it was an inexpensive Dell Latitude D620, and although it seems hard to believe now, it was quite spry for the time. Most importantly, though, all the hardware was compatible with Linux (Slackware at the time). It was a lesson that should have taken for future laptops, but I didn't really pay it any mind. I should have, though.

Fast-forward to fall of 2016, and my senior year of college. Because I was bone-headed and let a hardbound textbook fall on my HP Envy dv7-7227cl,which I had purchased in the fall of 2012 to replace the venerable Dell, which I had sold to an acquaintance, the screen cracked internally, a fact I discovered most unpleasantly when I went to turn it on. I could have had the screen replaced at a fraction of the cost of a new laptop, but realized the HP was going on 4 years old, and had relatively antiquated technology. To wit:

1) 17.3" screen at a resolution of 1600x900
2) 802.11n wifi
3) Low battery life (2 hours, max).

On the plus side, I was able to install Slackware with little to no difficulty. Since then, the juggernaut of Secure Boot/UEFI had invaded both desktops and laptops, making it significantly more difficult to install Linux. For manufacturers, this makes little to no difference, as most of the desktops and laptops sold come with Windows, and need no additional configuration beyond taking it out of the box, plugging it in, and turning it on. When a laptop is needed to run Linux, however, configuration beyond the usual becomes not only necessary, but also a bit of a pain, requiring discretion and extensive knowledge.

With the HP, all that was needed was to turn off Secure Boot, and to set the boot mode to Legacy, which allowed Slackware to install with LILO, which does not work well with UEFI. When I made the equivalent changes to the BIOS on the Lenovo Thinkpad I initially selected to replace the HP, it would not boot after installing Slackware. I tried several different configurations in the BIOS to allow Slackware to install, all to no avail. I went in search of a suitable replacement, and thought xubuntu might be the magic distro. It did install and boot, but only after setting the BIOS to look for UEFI boot devices before Legacy. It did install and boot, but would not work with my wifi card. After looking through the installed devices, I discovered it was a Broadcom 43162, which not only did not have any Linux support (even with the provided drivers, released 10/2015, because it was a newer chip), but there was no plans to add support for it anytime soon. Back to Newegg to look for a chip that would work with my laptop. I came across the Intel 7265, which was in the form my laptop took. It arrived, and I replaced the Broadcom chip (which totally sucks at connections, BTW) with the 7265. Problem solved?

Well, not quite. For reasons not clear to me even now, the 7265 appeared to lose connections in a matter of minutes after booting. I tried several approaches to rectify the issue, changing distros (from xubuntu to Manjaro to OpenSuSE), which made nary a difference; it appeared to be OS-agnostic, the conflict originating in the hardware itself. I have, at present, not tried booting Windows with it, but cannot speculate whether it will work with that OS.

Everyone has their limits, and I reached mine when I took my laptop to class and lost the connection, as per usual. I made up my mind then to go to Wal-Mart and look for a replacement. During the extended break between classes, I looked at laptops at Wal-Mart and decided on a Dell Inspiron 15 5000. I set the apppropriate options in the BIOS, installed Manjaro, and everything just worked. I was able to connect to the Internet with no difficulty, and to maintain it for the duration of my sessions. Success!

The irony of the situation was that I was opposed to Intel for their processor dominance, and so was not able to see that their wifi chips are well-supported in Linux, due to corporate support. It is a natural match, given that Intel processors (an i3, in this case), will always be paired with an Intel wifi chip, which really is the most important part of the laptop.

The Dell has excellent features:

1) Long battery life (7 hours)
2) 802.11ac wifi chip
3) Higher resolution (1920x1080)
4) Slimmer profile

I look forward to having a very satisfactory working relationship with my Dell.
